---
layout: post
title:  "Kubernetes Services"
author: commando
# categories: [ Jekyll, tutorial ]
# image: assets/images/1.jpg
---

# Kubernetes Services

## What is services in Kubernetes?
In a kubernetes world services are a special type of object which allow pods/containers to be accessed. It is a method of exposing a network application that is running as a pods or containers in your clusters.

So, what happens when you create a pod, where your application is running, you can access your application a) via `port-forward` approach for accessing it locally or b) you can access it directly via pods IP. When we create the Deployment to run our app, that deployment can create or destory your pods dynamically which means IP of pods gets created or destroyed which means IPs are not static but dynamic. In this case the end users will always has to update their system to point to the right IP.

So, the idea behind Services is that you do not need to modify the application to use an unfamiliar service discovery pattern. Service here will take care of it. When you create the service for your pods, k8s create an abstraction layer on top of your pods. Service will maintain all the changes in the pods, IP and also take care of service discovery pattern.

## Define a service
Service is an object which allows you to expose your group of pods.
In below example, a service named `my-service` will get created in default namespace and this service will target the groups of pods having label configured as `app.kubernetes.io/name: MyApp` on port 9376.
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: my-service
spec:
  selector:
    app.kubernetes.io/name: MyApp
  ports:
    - protocol: TCP
      port: 80
      targetPort: 9376
```

## Types of Services
There are different types of service sin kubernetes with different use cases
- ClusterIP
- NodePort
- LoadBalancer
- External
- Headless

### ClusterIP
This is a default service type. When you create service in kubernetes and you do not define the `.spec.type` in the definition yaml file then kubernetes will create a service of type `ClusterIP` and will assign a IP address from a pool of IP addresses tht your cluster has reserved for that purpose.

You can also define the `.spec.type` as `ClusterIP` but as mentioned by default it will be ClusterIP.

If you do have an existing dns names or entries or your own ClusterIP you can specify those as a part of service creation request. For that define the `.spec.clusterIP`field.

The benefit of having this type of service is that these services are not accessible outside cluster. As name suggest clusterIP these services are only be accessible within the cluster. For ex: lets say you have a microservice and database. The microservice need to commuicate to the database but the database does not need to be accessed eternally from the cluster. In this case we can create clusterIP type of service for database and allow the microservice to be accessed the database.

## NodePort
NodePort is a type of service where you will be able to access your application from outside of your kubernetes cluster by `<IP OF THE NODE>:<NODE PORT>`. If you create the service of type NodePort, then the kubernetes will allocates a port number from a range specified by `--service-node-port-range` flag (default 300000-32767). You can define the `NodePort` in `.spec.type` field as a `NodePort` and define the port in its `.spec.ports[*].nodePort` field.

This type of service gives you a freedom to choose your own nodeport and set up your own load balancing solution.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: my-service
spec:
  type: NodePort
  selector:
    app.kubernetes.io/name: MyApp
  ports:
    - port: 80
      # By default and for convenience, the `targetPort` is set to
      # the same value as the `port` field.
      targetPort: 80
      # Optional field
      # By default and for convenience, the Kubernetes control plane
      # will allocate a port from a range (default: 30000-32767).

      # If you do not mention in the service definition file, k8s will allocate one for you.
      nodePort: 30007
```

## LoadBalancer
This type of service you will be using with cloud providers like AWS, Google, Azure etc which support external load balancers. You can create the loadbalancer type service by setting the field `.spec.type` as `LoadBalancer`. Once the service is created then the cloud provider will provision a loadbalancer for you.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: my-service
spec:
  selector:
    app.kubernetes.io/name: MyApp
  ports:
    - protocol: TCP
      port: 80
      targetPort: 9376
  type: LoadBalancer
```
The beauty of the `LoadBalancer` service is most of the responsivility and load will be taken care by your cloud provider. 

## External Name
Service of type `ExternalName` allows you to map the service to a DNS name not to a selctor type.
To create the service set the field `.spec.type` as `ExternalName`.

So, when you r application running inside the pod, looking for the host `my-service.pods.svc.local.cluster`, then your service will return a response of dns record pointing to `my.database.example.com`.

The `ExternalName` service works in a same manner as others but the redirection happens at DNS level rather than via proxying or forwarding.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: my-service
  namespace: prod
spec:
  type: ExternalName
  externalName: my.database.example.com
```

## Headless
Sometimes you do not need a loadbalancing or a single Service IP in those cases you can create the service known as `Headless` services. In this type of service you will directly connect to pods backed by the headless service. You can still define the selectors in the definition file. You can create the service by setting the field `.spec.clusterIP` to `None`. 

In this, clusterIp will not allocate and there will be no load balancing.
